---
layout: post
title: New Workshops for Spring 2015
---

Several new courses have been announced.

**[Feb 23: Introduction to R for Life Scientists]({{site.baseurl}}/ws-intro-r-lifesci/):** This workshop is directed toward life scientists with little to no experience with statistical computing or bioinformatics. This interactive workshop will introduce the R statistical computing environment, including basic instruction in data types, variables, array manipulation, functions, data frames, data import/export, visualization, and using packages. At the end of the workshop, participants will see a live demonstration of a real biomedical application - analysis of publicly available RNA-seq data. This will demo (1) how to acquire publicly accessible data from NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus, and (2) how to use Bioconductor packages to import, process, QC, analyze, and visualize the results of the analysis. By the end of the workshop, participants will be able to use R for basic data manipulation and visualization, and will know where to look for further help and instruction. Participants will also be exposed to analyzing RNA-seq data. An advanced follow-on course will go through a gene expression data analysis in detail. This course is sponsored by the Claude Moore Health Sciences Library.

**[Feb 26: Advanced Data Manipulation with R]({{site.baseurl}}/ws-r-advanced-manipulation/):** Data analysis involves a large amount of [janitor work](http://www.nytimes.com/2014/08/18/technology/for-big-data-scientists-hurdle-to-insights-is-janitor-work.html) - munging and cleaning data to facilitate downstream data analysis. This workshop is designed for those with a basic familiarity with R who want to learn tools and techniques for advanced data manipulation. It will cover data cleaning and "tidy data," and will introduce participants to R packages that enable data manipulation, analysis, and visualization using split-apply-combine strategies. Upon completing this lesson, participants will be able to use the dplyr package in R to effectively manipulate and conditionally compute summary statistics over subsets of a "big" dataset containing many observations.

**[March 2: Advanced Data Visualization with R and ggplot2]({{site.baseurl}}/ws-r-advanced-visualization/):** This workshop will cover fundamental concepts for creating effective data visualization and will introduce tools and techniques for visualizing large, high-dimensional data using R. We will review fundamental concepts for visually displaying quantitative information, such as using series of small multiples, avoiding "chart-junk," and maximizing the data-ink ratio. After briefly covering data visualization using base R graphics, we will introduce the ggplot2 package for advanced high-dimensional visualization. We will cover the grammar of graphics (geoms, aesthetics, stats, and faceting), and using ggplot2 to create plots layer-by-layer. Upon completing this lesson, learners will be able to use ggplot2 to explore a high-dimensional dataset by faceting and scaling scatter plots in small multiples.

**[March 5-6: Software Carpentry for Biomedical Researchers](https://www.hsl.virginia.edu/node/14105):** The UVA Health Sciences Library and Bioinformatics Core have partnered to host a software skills bootcamp for graduate students, postdocs, and other scientists on March 5-6, 2015. During the two-day bootcamp, participants will learn the basic computing skills -- using the Bash shell, version control, computing and analysis with R, testing programs, and more -- increasingly necessary in data-rich pursuits. The bootcamp will be taught by [Software Carpentry](http://software-carpentry.org/) instructors.

**[April 6, 9, 13: Workshop Series: Data Analysis, Manipulation, and Visualization with R]({{site.baseurl}}/ws-r-series/):** This is a three-part series that conbines all three of the above workshops. The first session will introduce participants to the R environment and a dataset to be used for the remainder of the series. The two latter sessions will introduce participants to advanced data manipulation and visualization, using the same dataset introduced in the first session. This three-part workshop series will use a consistent example dataset for answering questions and completing exercises across all three sessions, culminating with a "capstone" analysis that integrates all covered material.

**[March 23, 26: RNA-seq data analysis bootcamp]({{site.baseurl}}/ws-rnaseq-1day/):** This workshop is directed toward life scientists with little to no experience with statistical computing or bioinformatics. This interactive workshop will introduce both the Linux/UNIX operating system and the R statistical computing environment, with a focus on a biological application - analyzing RNA-seq data for differentially expressed genes. The morning session will introduce basic operation in a UNIX environment, and will cover the first steps in an RNA-seq analysis including QC, alignment, and quantitation. The afternoon will introduce the R statistical computing environment, and will cover differential gene expression analysis using Bioconductor.
